hey this is Prussia tal Walker and
you're watching mind your decisions
I think Esther from Hungary for
suggesting this topic start out with the
quadrilateral where two of its opposite
sides have the same length of X label
the vertices a B C and D as typical with
math diagrams this diagram is not to
scale let angle a be 90 degrees and let
angle B be 100 degrees now draw
perpendicular bisectors for sides a b
and c d and mark the intersection point
is e an a/b will draw the perpendicular
bisector and on CD will draw the
perpendicular bisector and we'll mark
the intersection point as e because e
it's on the perpendicular bisector of a
B it is equidistant to a and B so these
two sides will have the same length
which will mark as Y next because E is
on the perpendicular bisector of C D is
equidistant to C and D so we'll mark
these two sides with the letter Z now
let's focus on one part of this diagram
the triangles EA D and e BC have three
equal sides so they are congruent
thus angles EA D and e BC must have
equal measure and we'll mark those
angles as alpha now let's focus on a
different part of the diagram now
triangles fa e and f b e have three
equal sides so once again they are
congruent and the angles fa e and f be e
must have equal measure and we'll mark
them as the angle being beta now let's
go back to our bigger diagram and the
angles for a and B by the given
information ba D is equal to 90 degrees
and ABC is equal to 100 degrees but we
just demonstrated that angle ba D is
equal to alpha plus beta which equals 90
degrees and angle ABC is equal to alpha
plus beta
which equals a hundred degrees therefore
we've proven that ninety degrees is
equal to alpha plus beta is equal to a
hundred degrees and so we've shown that
90 is equal to a hundred but this is an
absurd result so the question to you is
where is the mistake in this seemingly
convincing proof can you figure it out
give this problem a try and when you're
ready keep watching the video for a
solution so where is the mistake in this
proof to illustrate it I'm going to
scale the diagram down because I'm going
to draw the perpendicular bisectors a
little bit more accurately well draw the
perpendicular bisector for a B and then
we'll draw the perpendicular bisector
for C D notice they meet but when we
mark the point E it's on the exterior of
ABCD the point E where the perpendicular
bisectors meet is a not interior to the
shape ABCD this is where the mistake in
the proof originates but why does this
little detail matter
well let's connect e to a B C and D the
consequence that E is on the exterior is
that the steps where we found equal
angles summing to 90 and a hundred
degrees or incorrect notice that ABC is
not equal to C be e + FB e and BA D is
not equal to e ad + f AE so our steps do
not prove that angles B ad and ABC are
equal and therefore we cannot prove that
90 equals a hundred this false proof
demonstrates an important lesson you
have to be careful about assuming the
location of a constructed point
especially with diagrams not drawn to
scale did you figure out the mistake
thanks for watching these math videos
which can be watched for free on YouTube
inspire and build confidence for people
around the world and they already have
over a
hundred million views let's share the
beauty of mathematics with your help we
can map the world a better place please
subscribe for free to get the newest
videos watch and share all the mind your
decisions videos email me a puzzle or
math topic presh at mind your decisions
calm and if you so choose you can check
out my books which are listed in the
video description and you can support me
on patreon for exclusive rewards thanks
for watching and thanks for your support